right well hello everybody and welcome
to my June 2020 planetarium show this is
a show put together to show you exactly
what's in the skies and visible this
month either directly with the naked eye
or with binoculars or a small telescope
and in fact we zoom in on a few objects
using professional telescopes as well
just to show you them in their full
glory
I'll certainly a show running and we're
configured for the first of June and
it's in the afternoon at the moment with
the Sun in the sky we're going to run
time forwards we've got full control of
where we're looking and the time so that
we can bring the Sun down and bring it
towards the horizon here we go and as
the Sun descends towards the horizon
gradually you'll see that glow in the
sky as the color changes towards a more
orangey color and then it's just going
to dip down right below the far horizon
there and then we're going to bring it
to a stop
we've stopped here because we're going
to zoom right in and show you the planet
Venus this is the last chance to see it
as it's overtaking the earth on the
inside as it passes around it's all bit
more quickly than we do it catches up
with us and now it's at what's called
inferior conjunction which means it's
almost directly in line between the Sun
and the earth and so we're looking at
the night side of Venus so it renders it
almost impossible to see you might just
catch the thinnest of thin crescents
poking out around the edge there it's
been absolutely glorious sight all the
way through the month of May but now
this is really the end it's going to
pass in front of the Sun and then it'll
become the morning star so next month
we'll be seeing it early in the pre-dawn
sky glowing there so that's the planet
Venus very very difficult to spot
actually going through the rest of June
we've had some fantastic views of it and
I've taken some photographs of it and
showing the different phases of it as
its progressed through May so we've
zoomed
again and we're just going to let time
run forward to 9:30 just so that the sky
is a little bit darker and the sun's a
little bit below the horizon actually in
June it really being midsummer the Sun
doesn't go very far below the horizon
tall and the sky never really gets
properly dark for us here in Cambridge
but just poking through the trees here
you see the little white dots there
that's the planet Mercury the inner
planet a companion of Venus that orbits
round between the Earth and the Sun it's
the nearest planet to the Sun and here's
mercury just sharing a half NIT disk
with we're looking at it at its furthest
angular separation from the Sun when the
half of the day side and half of the
night side are visible to us and of
course the midpoint of the day side is
pointing down to the right towards the
Sun now I've only seen mercury with a
telescope four times in 40 odd years of
observing because it is very difficult
to catch and that's illustrated here by
the fact that it's so low on the horizon
even at its best that the simulation in
the planetarium Shoppe software is
showing it to be through a tree and
that's typical of my experience of
trying to observe mercury is that you've
got to catch it between the leaves of
the trees right on the horizon and if
you live anywhere where there are Hills
well forget it you probably got no
chance at all it's only a few degrees
above the horizon
so now let's go in search of some proper
darkness we'll move on
to 11 o'clock at night and so mercury
and the Sun and Venus will all disappear
but now the stars are beginning to come
out you'll see a few more of the
brightest stars there that's capella on
its own over to the right and the two
that I'm following Mercury down those
are the twins of Gemini castor and
Pollux we're but over here we've got the
moon nicely in the south just past half
phase now and it'll soon become full
later in the month and then on through
over into the early morning sky and when
you see it at three-quarters like this
you get a good view of quite a lot of
the large impact basins the moiré there
the dark regions that the Greeks thought
were flooded areas while they were
flooded but they were flooded millions
of years ago with liquid rock which is
solidified and that's what gives them
the smooth appearance now here's the
constellation of Leo to the right of the
moon that really does look a bit like a
lion in this even in the stick drawing
we can put the artwork on and show you
where the line is supposed to be and I
think you'll agree it's not a bad
representation and there's one or two
objects that are of interest in Leo when
we're looking in this direction from the
earth we're looking up out of the galaxy
out of the Milky Way and towards lots of
other galaxies that we can see and
here's a group of them you can see a
couple at the bottom there but we've
zoomed right in on this trio and these
are three smallish galaxies easily two
findable with a medium-sized telescope
and they go by the catalogue numbers 95
96 and 105 in Charles Messier s catalog
here's one that Charles missed though
this is NGC 2903 or the Catherine Wheel
as I call it
there's a lovely barred spiral galaxy in
Leo about 20 million light-years away
from us
and you see that bar across the middle
in the red pink color of the nucleus and
the blue spiral arms there it's really
quite an attractive looking object there
lots of other groups of galaxies that
are visible inside Leo but we're going
to zoom back over to the next
constellation and that's Virgo and
that's of course the moon sat in the
middle of the body of Virgo they're just
at the moment that will move from night
to night but there's the stick diagram
of Virgo and there she is
holding a bunch of flowers and again
this is the realm of the galaxies when
we look with a telescope all through the
area of Virgo we find lots and lots of
galaxies as a whole chain of them here
we can see the really big elliptical
galaxies there in the center and some
smaller spiral galaxies dotted around
and this is the Virgo cluster 50 million
light-years away here's the
high-resolution
telescope view showing how beautiful
these galaxies are and we are being
drawn towards this cluster of galaxies
the Virgo group and we're moving towards
it about two million miles an hour in
fact but it's 50 million light-years so
it's gonna take a very long time for the
Milky Way galaxy and all its contents to
get there
here's the constellation next door
Bootes the herdsman looks like a giant
kite shape with a couple of sticky out
bits at the bottom they're very
recognizable in the sky but not quite
sure how you made a herdsman from it but
never mind
the brightest star in the constellation
is that one that you can see there just
below center and that is Arcturus and
that is a bright orange star
it's just 37 light-years away from the
Sun and about the same mass as our Sun
but a bit older our Sun is four and a
half billion years old and Arcturus is
seven billion
as a result of that greater age it's
used up most of its fuel converting the
hydrogen to helium and that's why it's
swelled up to be an orange giant now
just next door in the constellation is
Messier z-- object number three a
globular cluster now quite a few of
these globular clusters and as we go
through into the high-resolution picture
here you can see it's made of a terrific
number of stars all packed together in a
very compact region and these globular
clusters there are about 400 of them
that orbit around the outside of the
Milky Way rather like bees round a honey
pot they're distributed in every
direction
and now we're gonna zoom in on the
constellation of Coma Berenices
Bernice's hair
this means it's those three stars
they're drawn together with the two
lines but there are lots of other stars
there you can see it's just at
representing a bundle of hair just below
the two dogs there will come and look at
those in a moment that's some other
constellation of the hunting dogs but
it's Bernice's hair rather obscure
constellation but inside it we've got a
rather nice-looking galaxy that we can
go and find called the black eye galaxy
you can see why it's called the black
eye galaxy it looks like someone's
punched it in the nose or in the face
there 24 million light years away from
us so a relatively nearby galaxy again
most of the galaxies that we can find
with amateur telescopes are round about
to 10 20 30 million light years away it
takes a bigger telescope to go much
further than that so that was the black
eye galaxy and we've got another
globular cluster another of these balls
of half a million or so stars just
outside the Milky Way this one's a
little bit more distant and called m-53
and it's fifty eight thousand light
years away so say just outside it and
over to the left there's another cluster
of stars that you can often find these
two together
and they make a good contrast with a
pair of binoculars so those are the main
objects worth looking at in that area of
Coma Berenices now we saw this just now
the constellation of Canis Vanessa saw
another small constellation with well
two main stars in it so again I'm not
sure how they made two dogs out of two
stars but this is the hunting dogs
perhaps they're supposed to go with the
herdsman next door they're chemists for
Vanessa sigh and Bootes the herdsman but
if we look inside the constellation
again we're going to find
another few objects that are worth
tracking down if you do have a small
telescope the first object though is
coal caroli Charles's heart this is a
star and it's the reddest giant star
there is is a bright a type star there
and a smaller component an f-type star
making up a double and that's a very
prominent object they're worth having a
look at with binoculars just here though
we've got the sunflower galaxy and the
spiral structure of this galaxy looks
much more flocculated I suppose the word
is more fluffy again 27 million light
years away so part of the same group
that the black eye galaxy is in but the
spiral arms definitely look rather
different in that particular galaxy lots
and lots of separate short spiral arms
and the Crocs I galaxy 16 million
light-years away again showing that very
similar fluffy structure almost
identical to the sunflower galaxy
so we'll move on now to pull right back
and go to the wide view there's a very
familiar group of stars has now appeared
to the right center of the screen there
that's the plough we can all recognize
that I hope may be the tail of the play
or the Big Dipper the saucepan about
various different names
and we're gonna move on a little bit
towards midnight just to get everything
positioned perfectly there's satellite
going across the screen there quite a
few of them you can see they'd like to
whiz around and we'll just get
everything blind up where I want it
you
so right in the center of the screen
they can still see the constellation of
the Bootes the herdsman aren't Taurus
the bright star just right of Center in
that kite shape but we're going to go
and look now at the plough the Big
Dipper the saucepan part of the large
constellation of Ursa Major the Great
Bear so you can see the front legs and
the rear legs of the bear there and his
head and the tail going off the screen
just next door to canis finatus eye and
Coma Berenices there so they can use
that as a signpost to try to find things
right in the tail of the Great Bear you
got another double star Mizar and its
companion
Alcor there and these can be seen as
separate with anyone with good eyesight
and you get a nice clear night they're
far enough apart the naked eye can see
them but if you soon right in with a
powerful telescope you can discover that
Mizar itself is a double two stars
orbiting around each other and in fact
Alcor also is a double star so this a
quadruple star system and these multiple
star systems are really quite common you
can already see the next target that's
the pinwheel galaxy Messier 101 in the
catalog and that's a classic face on
spiral galaxy there with the spiral arms
whirling away from the center and it's
another one of these galaxies that we
find around us around 20 million light
years away there's the high resolution
Sky Survey image of the pinwheel galaxy
and off to the right there there's
another little spiral and there was
another one to the left if you had sharp
eyes you would have spotted those as the
high-resolution image kicked in so we'll
pull back away from the pinwheel galaxy
and we'll cross over now south of the
tail of the Great Bear down below it
here
and here we have the Whirlpool Galaxy
and the interesting thing about the
Whirlpool Galaxy is that there's a
second dwarf galaxy that's come too
close to it and the powerful gravity of
the Whirlpool is disrupting and tearing
apart that companion performing a bridge
of material between the two basically
the Whirlpool Galaxy is eating the
smaller one and that's how galaxies grow
they're cannibalistic they get big by
eating smaller ones so that was the
Whirlpool Galaxy now we've got the owl
nebula also in Ursa Major and this is an
entirely different type of object this
is what will happen to a star like the
Sun or Arcturus when they finally run
out of fuel they puff off their outer
layers forming what's called a planetary
nebula she's got nothing to do with
planets they just looked round to old
ancient people with not very good
telescopes but they're the outer
atmosphere of stars being cuffed away as
they die just next door to the owl
nebula we've got em 108 another spiral
galaxy
this one's viewed almost a John so you
can't really see the spiral arms very
well you can see the dark dust lanes and
this is 45 million light-years away so
it's getting out towards the edge of
what a standard amateur telescope will
reach
so we're going to cross over north and
east now of the bout bowl of the Big
Dipper and find another couple of
galaxies it really is galaxy season
these are superbly well placed at this
time of year almost directly above your
head
we have bodes galaxy on the left there
with its lovely spiral structure face on
to us and to the right of it we've got
its companion the cigar galaxy and
rather like we had in the Whirlpool
Galaxy the cigar galaxy has come too
close to its larger neighbor and it the
gravity of it is pulling it apart you
can see all the material being shot out
of the the centre there of left and
right of the centre of the cigar galaxy
in red that's hydrogen gas glowing
because it's been disrupted and cest
forming new stars by the disruption of
its powerful neighbour they had a
near-miss with each other about six
million years ago but we've moved on now
from the Great Bear to the Little Bear
Ursa Minor it's like a smaller version
of the saucepan there with the bowl and
the big long tail and this is a minor
the little bear now should point out
that real bears don't have long tails so
they got this a bit wrong when they were
making the constellations up it's more
the tale that you would attribute to an
animal like a fox
but never mind I'm going to zoom in now
on the tip of the tail of the little
bear
and that's Polaris the pole star or the
North Star now this is always visible
from anywhere in the night sky if you're
in the northern hemisphere it'll be
somewhere because it sits directly above
the pole of the earth if you stood at
the North Pole and look directly above
your head it would be right above you
but the further south you go the lower
it is in the sky but it's always north
of you and as the world turns on its
axis the whole sky seems to pivot around
the pole star which stays still you can
also see how a lot of the satellites
that are whizzing across
the screen here are whizzing in polar
orbits so they seem to go very close to
Polaris in the sky now we're running
time backwards and we're just going to
put everything back where we were over
to the right of the screen you can see
the W shape of the constellation of
Cassiopeia with the band of light of the
Milky Way running through it
that's almost directly opposite the
Great Bear in the sky and so at this
time of year it's quite low and to the
north not the best time for looking at
that so right we're back to midnight now
and we've put the pole star back there
with Polaris there right in the center
of the screen and we're going to pull
back a little bit you can see the bowl
of the Great Bear up to the left there
top left but we're going to look over
here at a smaller constellation called
Lyra this is supposed to be a Greek
musical instrument called the lyre L Y
re and Greek and it's that rectangular
arrangement of stars a parallelogram
that's the word and one bright star just
off to the side there it's a very bright
star called Vega so we'll have a look at
Vegas one of the nearby stars only 25
light-years away and it's hotter and
brighter than the Sun puts out about 40
times more energy and the Sun has a
temperature of 5700 degrees and they go
there it's 9,000 considerably hotter at
a very bright white hot colored star but
right in the middle of this
constellation just at the between the
lower two stars at the bottom we've got
another of these dying star remnants our
planetary nebula and this one is the
ring nebula that's one we're looking at
straight down it's polar axis and so you
can see how the ring of material
as being puffed off and we're seeing
right in the center there that dead
nuclear core of the original star a
white dwarf star the remnant left over
after all the atmosphere has been puffed
away now quite a few of those sort of
objects in the sky and they're really
quite attractive to look at we do need
quite a big telescope to see them
because they're rather small but to zoom
in a very long way there to show you
that beautiful view the Milky Way
running across the bottom of the screen
there is dark dust lanes and the milky
color of millions and millions of stars
and the constellation of Cygnus running
along its back there is a sort of cross
shape with the neck outstretched to the
right and the wings up and down can
probably make that out lots of
satellites whizzing across the sky we're
heading towards the door now and we're
gonna aim for 315 just before it starts
to get light and stop and there will be
a reason for that and that is because we
are going to show you some of the
planets in a moment but first here's the
constellation of Sagittarius and this is
an archer looks more like a teapot to me
and you can see that teapot shape there
but if we show the artwork somehow that
is supposed to represent a scent or
firing an arrow I really can't make that
out I guess they haven't invented tea
pots but this is the direction when we
look this way we're looking towards the
star clouds of the center of our galaxy
and here's the Eagle Nebula with the
pillars of creation in the center there
the Hubble Space Telescope took a very
iconic color photograph of those here we
can see the white stars and the pink of
glowing hydrogen gas again that same
color pink in the Swan nebula these
nebulae are where new stars are being
formed as cold gas a track
together with dust under gravity and all
pulls itself together into dense knots
that go on to fall in and compress
themselves to form stars this is the
Lagoon Nebula another star cloud where
new stars are being formed you can see
quite a lot of the bright hot white
stars that have been born in the center
of the Lagoon Nebula here as a new star
cluster that's emerging from the cocoon
in which it formed and just next door to
the Lagoon Nebula we've got the trifid
nebula one of my favorite objects you've
got the nebula clouds they're showing
different colors pink from hydrogen and
then some blue from a very hot blue star
that's off to the right of Center
they're shining and lighting the gas up
with its blue light and the dark dust
lanes carving their way across in front
of the nebula gasps there so lots and
lots of objects in this region it's very
rich in star clusters and nebulae
because it's a very dense piece of the
Milky Way lots of dark dust lanes across
the Milky Way itself you can see there
there are blocking our line of sight so
that's worth scanning with a pair of
binoculars you'll find all sorts of
interesting things but I stopped at 3:15
because it's the perfect time to look at
some of the planets that are lurking in
the morning sky at the moment and here
is Jupiter this is what a man with a
telescope would first show of Jupiter
and it's four large moons we've got the
cloud belts running across the
equatorial plane of Jupiter they're
north and south of it and the darker
polar regions that's what you would
actually see with the eye through maybe
a six inch or an eight inch telescope
with a more powerful telescope you can
zoom in and I've can take images like
this with the telescope in my
observatory showing the cloud belts and
all of the turbulence and the movement
of smaller spots a great red spot it
happens to be on the other side of
Jupiter at the moment and that's happens
about half the time as it spins around
we can see one or two of Jupiter's
smaller moons they're just off
to the left but the big for our IO which
we're zooming in on right now and this
shows us like yellow color to the
telescope but spacecraft images show
this pizza like effect with lots of
different colors of sulfur sulfur can
form black yellow orange or white forms
and IO is so volcanic the whole surface
is covered in sulfur we pull away from
IO and move for the second nearest moon
that's Europa both of these are about
the same size as our own Earth's moon
and Europa is fascinating because it's
covered in ice with these grooves and
gashes in it up way up through which it
looks like brown organic material has
been welling and we believe from studies
that there's a ocean underneath the
thick ice crust and it's potential
habitat for alien life underneath
swimming around in the oceans of Europa
here's the next moon Ganymede and this
is actually a larger moon it's the
largest moon in the solar system and
bigger even than the planet Mercury that
we saw at the beginning of this
planetarium show covered in glaciers
flowing across the surface and this also
has the potential for having a liquid
water ocean underneath that surface
layer so we pulled back and they will
look at kalisto very dark in color and a
very ancient surface covered in craters
so not an enormous amount of geological
activity on Callisto
that's because it's farthest away from
Jupiter and doesn't orbit in a pattern
that the other three all take part in
they are all in the other three are all
locked in tug of war with each other
which keeps them stirring their surfaces
up through gravitational energy and
tidal forces but right next door to the
planet Jupiter at the moment in the sky
another bright object and that is Saturn
now if we look at Saturn through a small
telescope and look like this you'll see
the body and you'll see the Rings even
with a six inch telescope or perhaps
with a very powerful pair of binoculars
you might just be able to see the Rings
you'll also be able to pick out some of
the moons the biggest and brightest is
Titan and then we have the oniria
thethis Enceladus
- Hyperion and there are lots of them
and they're all orbiting around outside
the rings of Saturn there you can see a
few of the smaller ones the more
powerful telescope the more of the moons
you'll be able to pick out and it's
quite a good sport chasing down to work
out which ones which and using a star
Atlas or an app on a phone to help you
you can almost always guaranteed to see
Titan it's very recognizable it has this
slightly orange color to it through a
telescope and that is because it is got
an atmosphere all of its own that's even
denser than our own atmosphere and it's
full of smoggy orange clouds so we can't
see the surface but the Cassini probe
did drop a lander down through the
clouds that parachuted down and showed
us that underneath those clouds there
are lakes and rivers and it's obviously
got its own weather going on with clouds
rain and snow falling but all of the
rain and the snow and the rivers are
made not of water but of liquid methane
now here we have the final object on our
tour and that's the planet Mars just
visible before dawn and it's showing a
three quarter phase going to be better
observed later in the year when we catch
up with it and overtake it on the inside
we'll be at a closest approach later on
this year but so there it is in the
morning sky and the two moons there
Phobos and Deimos fear and terror to go
with Mars the God of War
if we zoom right in you can just see on
the bottom there the south polar cap a
small white area it's summer in that
region at the moment
so the polar cap is quite small and also
the big gash across the left center
there
that's Valles Marineris the Martian
Grand Canyon that if it was on earth it
would go all the way from Los Angeles to
New York it's absolutely immense far
bigger than our earthly Grand Canyon
so that was a whistle-stop tour 3:15 in
the morning at Mars glowing there just
before in the pre-dawn sky and if I let
time run any further forward then the
Sun will soon rise above the horizon we
really don't get very long nights at all
in June it's not a hugely great month
for astronomers from that point of view
because we only get a couple of hours of
darkness around midnight to 1:00 a.m.
the rest of the time it's really
Twilight and you can see as time's going
forward here that we're losing the Stars
progressively I wanted to satellites
whizzing across there's so many of them
up there I remember when I was a first
observing when I was a young boy back in
the 1970s it was a miracle if we saw one
satellite but now you can't miss them
there are so many ok thank you very much
for watching I hope you've enjoyed this
tour of the night sky for June of 2020
and please do watch some of my other
videos on other subjects related to
astronomy that are on my youtube channel
you'll see the subscribe button I hope
and that should allow you to not miss
any of them